.\" kge(1) — Kyle's Graphical Editor (GUI-first)
.\"
.\" Project homepage: https://github.com/wntrmute/kte
.TH KGE 1 "2025-12-01" "kte 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kge \- Kyle's Graphical Editor (GUI-first)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kge
[
.I options
]
[
.I files ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kge
is the GUI-first build target of Kyle's Text Editor. It shares the same
editor core and command model as
.BR kte (1),
and defaults to the graphical ImGui frontend when available. A terminal
(ncurses) frontend is also available and can be requested explicitly with
.B --term
or by invoking
.BR kte (1).

If one or more
.I files
are provided, they are opened on startup; otherwise, an empty buffer is
created.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -g, --gui
Use the GUI frontend (default for
.B kge
when built).
.TP
.B -t, --term
Use the terminal (ncurses) frontend instead of the GUI.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Display a brief usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B -V, --version
Print version information and exit.
.SH KEYBINDINGS
The GUI shares the same commands and keybindings as the terminal editor.
They are summarized here for convenience. See the ke manual in the source
tree for the canonical reference and notes:
.I docs/ke.md
.
.SS K-commands (prefix Ctrl-K)
.PP
Enter K-command mode with Ctrl-K. Exit K-command mode with ESC or Ctrl-G.
.TP
.B C-k '
Toggle read-only for the current buffer.
.TP
.B C-k -
If the mark is set, unindent the region.
.TP
.B C-k =
If the mark is set, indent the region.
.TP
.B C-k ;
Open the generic command prompt (": ").
.TP
.B C-k a
Set the mark at the beginning of the file, then jump to the end of the file.
.TP
.B C-k b
Switch to a buffer.
.TP
.B C-k c
Close the current buffer. If no other buffers are open, an empty buffer will be opened. To exit, use C-k q.
.TP
.B C-k d
Delete from the cursor to the end of the line.
.TP
.B C-k C-d
Delete the entire line.
.TP
.B C-k e
Edit (open) a new file.
.TP
.B C-k f
Flush the kill ring.
.TP
.B C-k g
Go to a specific line.
.TP
.B C-k h
Show the built-in help (+HELP+ buffer).
.TP
.B C-k j
Jump to the mark.
.TP
.B C-k l
Reload the current buffer from disk.
.TP
.B C-k n
Switch to the previous buffer.
.TP
.B C-k o
Change working directory (prompt).
.TP
.B C-k p
Switch to the next buffer.
.TP
.B C-k q
Exit the editor. If the file has unsaved changes, a warning will be printed; a second C-k q will exit.
.TP
.B C-k C-q
Immediately exit the editor.
.TP
.B C-k r
Redo changes.
.TP
.B C-k s
Save the file, prompting for a filename if needed.
.TP
.B C-k u
Undo.
.TP
.B C-k v
Toggle visual file picker (GUI).
.TP
.B C-k w
Show the current working directory.
.TP
.B C-k x
Save the file and exit. Also C-k C-x.
.TP
.B C-k y
Yank the kill ring.
.TP
.B C-k C-x
Save the file and exit.

.SS Other keybindings
.TP
.B C-g
Cancel the current operation.
.TP
.B C-a
Move to the beginning of the line.
.TP
.B C-e
Move to the end of the line.
.TP
.B C-b
Move left.
.TP
.B C-f
Move right.
.TP
.B C-n
Move down.
.TP
.B C-p
Move up.
.TP
.B C-l
Refresh the display.
.TP
.B C-d
Delete the character at the cursor.
.TP
.B C-r
Regex search.
.TP
.B C-s
Incremental find.
.TP
.B C-t
Regex search and replace.
.TP
.B C-h
Search and replace.
.TP
.B C-u
Universal argument. C-u followed by numbers will repeat an operation n times.
.TP
.B C-w
Kill the region if the mark is set.
.TP
.B C-y
Yank the kill ring.
.TP
.B ESC <
Move to the beginning of the file.
.TP
.B ESC >
Move to the end of the file.
.TP
.B ESC m
Toggle the mark.
.TP
.B ESC BACKSPACE
Delete the previous word.
.TP
.B ESC b
Move to the previous word.
.TP
.B ESC d
Delete the next word.
.TP
.B ESC f
Move to the next word.
.TP
.B ESC q
Reflow the paragraph to 72 columns or the value of the universal argument.
.TP
.B ESC w
Save the region (if the mark is set) to the kill ring.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TERM
Used if the terminal frontend is selected.
.TP
.B LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE
Determine locale and character encoding.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.kte/
Future configuration directory (not yet stabilized).
.TP
.I kge.app
On macOS, the GUI is built and installed as an app bundle. The command-line
wrapper
.B kge
may still be available for launching with files.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success, non-zero on failure.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Launch GUI (default) with multiple files:
.RS
.nf
  kge main.cc Buffer.cc
.fi
.RE
.TP
Open using the terminal frontend from kge:
.RS
.nf
  kge --term README.md
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kte (1),
.I docs/ke.md
(project keybinding manual)
.br
Project homepage: https://github.com/wntrmute/kte
.SH BUGS
Report issues on the project tracker. Some behaviors are inherited from
ke and may evolve over time; see the manual for notes.
.SH AUTHORS
Kyle (wntrmute) and contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 Kyle. License as per project repository.
.SH NOTES
This page documents kte/kge version 0.1.0.
